add getting started guide for BIRD (#10326)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/gettingstarted/bird.rst

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    http://docs.cilium.io

.. _bird:

****************************
Using BIRD to run BGP
****************************

`BIRD is an open-source implementation for routing Internet Protocol
packets on Unix-like operating systems <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bird_Internet_routing_daemon>`_.

> If you are not familiar with it, better to have a glance at the `User's Guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are not familiar with it, you had best have a glance at the `User's Guide
```

<https://bird.network.cz/?get_doc&f=bird.html&v=20>`_ first.

`BIRD <https://bird.network.cz>`_ maintains two release families at present:
``1.x`` and ``2.x``, and the configuration format varies a lot between them.
Unless you have already deployed the ``1.x`` series, we suggest using ``2.x``
directly, as the ``2.x`` will live longer. In the following, we will denote
``bird`` as the ``bird2`` software.

This guide shows how to install and configure BIRD on CentOS 7.x to make it
collaborating with Cilium. Installation and configurations on other platforms

> should be much similar.

Reviewer: We can't use `much` with positive adjectives.
```suggestion
should be very similar.
```

    
    # Forbide synchronizing BIRD routing tables with the OS kernel.
    protocol kernel {
            ipv4 {                    # Connect protocol to IPv4 table by channel
                    import none;      # Import to table, default is import all
                    export none;      # Export to protocol. default is export none
            };
    }
    
    # Static IPv4 routes.
    protocol static {
          ipv4;
          route {{ POD_CIDR }} via "cilium_host";
    }
    
    # BGP peers
    protocol bgp uplink0 {
          description "BGP uplink 0";
          local {{ NODE_IP }} as {{ NODE_ASN  }};
          neighbor {{ NEIGHBOR_0_IP }} as {{ NEIGHBOR_0_ASN }};
          password {{ NEIGHBOR_PWD }};
    
          ipv4 {
                  import filter {reject;};
                  export filter {accept;};
          };
    }

    protocol bgp uplink1 {
          description "BGP uplink 1";
          local {{ NODE_IP }} as {{ NODE_ASN  }};
          neighbor {{ NEIGHBOR_1_IP }} as {{ NEIGHBOR_1_ASN }};
          password {{ NEIGHBOR_PWD }};
    
          ipv4 {
                  import filter {reject;};
                  export filter {accept;};
          };
    }

> Replace the placeholders with your own ones:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace the placeholders with your own:
```

- ``NODE_IP``: IP address of this node
- ``NODE_ASN``: autonomous system number (ASN) of this node
- ``NEIGHBOR_*_IP``: IP address of the BGP peer
- ``NEIGHBOR_*_ASN``: ASN of the BGP peer

> - ``NEIGHBOR_PWD``: password of the BGP peer

Reviewer: Maybe move this before the configuration and rewrite to `export NODE_IP ip_address_of_node` form? I'm not sure we expect users to run this directly though.

Author: If you are considering copy-paste-and-run by users, maybe i should rewrite this part as something like following?

```shell
sed -i 's/NODE_ASN/<node asn>/g' /etc/bird.conf
sed -i 's/NEIGHBOR_0_IP/<neighbor 0 ip>/g' /etc/bird.conf
sed -i 's/NEIGHBOR_1_IP/<neighbor 1 ip>/g' /etc/bird.conf
sed -i 's/NEIGHBOR_PWD/<neighbor password>/g' /etc/bird.conf
```

This may be more easier for new users. @pchaigno

Reviewer: Ah, yes. That's better :+1:

Author: Thank you, i will update in this way.

Restart bird and check the logs:

.. code:: bash

    $ systemctl restart bird

    # check logs
    $ journalctl -u bird
    -- Logs begin at Sat 2020-02-22 16:11:44 CST, end at Mon 2020-02-24 18:58:35 CST. --
    Feb 24 18:58:24 node systemd[1]: Started BIRD Internet Routing Daemon.
    Feb 24 18:58:24 node systemd[1]: Starting BIRD Internet Routing Daemon...
    Feb 24 18:58:24 node bird[137410]: Started

> Verify the changes, you maybe get something like this:

Reviewer: `should get`?

Author: yeah, fixed it.

.. code:: bash

    $ birdc show route
    BIRD 2.0.6 ready.
    Table master4:
    10.5.48.0/24         unicast [static1 20:14:51.478] * (200)
            dev cilium_host

This means that the PodCIDR ``10.5.48.0/24`` on this node has been successfully
announed to the BGP peers.

Monitoring
##############

`bird_exporter <https://github.com/czerwonk/bird_exporter>`_ collects bird
daemon's states, and exports Prometheus metrics.

It also provides a simple Grafana dashboard, but you could also create your

> own, e.g. `Trip.com's one <https://ctripcloud.github.io/cilium/network/2020/01/19/trip-first-step-towards-cloud-native-networking.html>`_ looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
own, e.g. `Trip.com's <https://ctripcloud.github.io/cilium/network/2020/01/19/trip-first-step-towards-cloud-native-networking.html>`_ looks like this:
```

is a detection protocol designed to accelerate path failure detection.

**This feature also relies on configurations on the peer side.**

.. code:: bash

    protocol bfd {
          interface "{{ grains['node_mgnt_device'] }}" {
                  min rx interval 100 ms;
                  min tx interval 100 ms;
                  idle tx interval 300 ms;
                  multiplier 10;
                  password {{ NEIGHBOR_PWD }};
          };
    
          neighbor {{ NEIGHBOR_0_IP] }};
          neighbor {{ NEIGHBOR_1_IP] }};
    }
    
    protocol bgp uplink0 {
    		...
    
            bfd on;
    }

Verify, you should see something like this:

.. code:: bash

    $ birdc show bfd sessions
    BIRD 2.0.6 ready.
    bfd1:
    IP address                Interface  State      Since         Interval  Timeout
    10.5.40.2                 bond0      Up         20:14:51.479    0.300    0.000
    10.5.40.3                 bond0      Up         20:14:51.479    0.300    0.000

ECMP
------

For some special purposes (e.g. L4LB), you may configure a same CIDR on

> multiple nodes. In this case, you need configure `Equal-Cost Multi-Path (ECMP) routing <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equal-cost_multi-path_routing>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
multiple nodes. In this case, you need to configure `Equal-Cost Multi-Path (ECMP) routing <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equal-cost_multi-path_routing>`_.
```

**This feature also relies on configurations on the peer side.**

.. code:: bash

    protocol kernel {
            ipv4 {                    # Connect protocol to IPv4 table by channel
                    import none;      # Import to table, default is import all
                    export none;      # Export to protocol. default is export none
            };
    
            # Configure ECMP
            merge paths yes limit {{ N }} ;
    }

> See user's manual for more detailed information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the user manual for more detailed information.
```

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    http://docs.cilium.io

> .. _bird:

Reviewer: Sphinx complains that this is duplicated: `WARNING: Duplicate explicit target name: "bird".` I'm guessing there's already an implicit target for the document's name.
```suggestion
```

****************************
Using BIRD to run BGP
****************************

`BIRD is an open-source implementation for routing Internet Protocol
packets on Unix-like operating systems <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bird_Internet_routing_daemon>`_.
If you are not familiar with it, better to have a glance at the `User's Guide
<https://bird.network.cz/?get_doc&f=bird.html&v=20>`_ first.

`BIRD <https://bird.network.cz>`_ maintains two release families at present:
``1.x`` and ``2.x``, and the configuration format varies a lot between them.
Unless you have already deployed the ``1.x``, we suggest using ``2.x``
directly, as the ``2.x`` will live longer. In the following, we will denote
``bird`` as the ``bird2`` software.

> This guide shows how to install and configure bird on CentOS `7.x` to make it

Reviewer: The backticks should be doubled here:
```suggestion
This guide shows how to install and configure bird on CentOS ``7.x`` to make it
```

collaborating with Cilium. Installation and configurations on other platforms
should be much similar.

Install bird
##################

.. code:: bash

    $ yum install -y bird2

    $ systemctl enable bird
    $ systemctl restart bird

Test the installation:

.. code:: bash

    $ birdc show route
    BIRD 2.0.6 ready.

    $ birdc              # interactive shell
    BIRD 2.0.6 ready.
    bird> show bfd sessions
    There is no BFD protocol running
    bird>
    bird> show protocols all
    Name       Proto      Table      State  Since         Info
    device1    Device     ---        up     10:53:40.147
    
    direct1    Direct     ---        down   10:53:40.147
      Channel ipv4
        State:          DOWN
        Input filter:   ACCEPT
        Output filter:  REJECT
    ...

Basic configuration
#####################

It's hard to discuss bird configurations without considering specific BGP
schemes. However, BGP scheme design is beyond of the scope of this guide.
If you are interested in this topic, refer to `BGP in the Data Center

> <https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/bgp-in-the/9781491983416/>`_ (O'Reilly,

Reviewer: Sphinx complains here because this word isn't in our dictionary yet. Could you run
```
./Documentation/update-spelling_wordlist.sh O\'Reilly
```
and commit the updated dictionary?

Author: Done.

2017) for a quick start.

In the following, we will restrict our BGP scenario as follows:

.. raw:: html

>     <p align="center"><img src="images/bird_sample_topo.png" width="35%" height="35%"></p>

Reviewer: We need to use the reStructuredText-specific syntax here, otherwise the image are not properly included in the Read the doc rendering. According to the [documentation](https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/directives.html#images), I think this is what you want:
```reStructuredText
.. image:: images/bird_sample_bgp.png
   :scale: 70%
```

Author: I have followed you advice, but `:scale 70%` seems too large for these two pictures, should I change it to `35%`? 

hi @pchaigno , in case you missed this.

Reviewer: I checked the rendering and they looked okay to me. What makes you think they're too large? I think `scale` is a percentage of the column width here.

Author: I preview then in github repository directly, like this page: https://github.com/ctripcloud/cilium/blob/bird_guide/Documentation/gettingstarted/bird.rst

As they looks ok in your rendering, I'll keep them 70%.

Reviewer: ~~Weird. I see about the same size with Sphinx if I use 70%... I guess GitHub's parser ([docutils](https://github.com/github/markup#markups)) and Sphinx's don't interpret the `scale` field the same way.~~ Hm, they actually both use docutils so maybe the images are different because of the different width of the containing HTML element (GitHub's looks larger). 

If you want to double check this, [you can run `make render-docs`](https://docs.cilium.io/en/latest/contributing/testing/documentation/). It will start a container to serve the rendered documentation.

Author: Learned! Thanks :)

* physical network: simple 3-tier hierarchical architecture
* nodes connect to physical network via layer 2 switches
* announcing each node's PodCIDR to physical network via `bird`
* for each node, do not import route announcements from physical network

In this design, the BGP connections look like this:

.. raw:: html

>     <p align="center"><img src="images/bird_sample_bgp.png" width="35%" height="35%"></p>

Reviewer: ```reStructuredText
.. image:: images/bird_sample_bgp.png
   :scale: 70%
```

          password {{ NEIGHBOR_PWD }};
    
          ipv4 {
                  import filter {reject;};
                  export filter {accept;};
          };
    }

Replace the placeholders with your own ones:

- ``NODE_IP``: IP address of this node
- ``NODE_ASN``: autonomous system number (ASN) of this node
- ``NEIGHBOR_*_IP``: IP address of the BGP peer
- ``NEIGHBOR_*_ASN``: ASN of the BGP peer
- ``NEIGHBOR_PWD``: password of the BGP peer

Restart bird and check the logs:

.. code:: bash

    $ systemctl restart bird

    # check logs
    $ journalctl -u bird
    -- Logs begin at Sat 2020-02-22 16:11:44 CST, end at Mon 2020-02-24 18:58:35 CST. --
    Feb 24 18:58:24 node systemd[1]: Started BIRD Internet Routing Daemon.
    Feb 24 18:58:24 node systemd[1]: Starting BIRD Internet Routing Daemon...
    Feb 24 18:58:24 node bird[137410]: Started

Verify the changes, you should get something like this:

.. code:: bash

    $ birdc show route
    BIRD 2.0.6 ready.
    Table master4:
    10.5.48.0/24         unicast [static1 20:14:51.478] * (200)
            dev cilium_host

This indicates that the PodCIDR ``10.5.48.0/24`` on this node has been

> successfully announed to the BGP peers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
successfully announced to the BGP peers.
```

Monitoring
##############

`bird_exporter <https://github.com/czerwonk/bird_exporter>`_ could collect bird
daemon states, and export Prometheus-style metrics.

It also provides a simple Grafana dashboard, but you could also create your
own, e.g. `Trip.com's one <https://ctripcloud.github.io/cilium/network/2020/01/19/trip-first-step-towards-cloud-native-networking.html>`_ looks like this:

.. raw:: html

>     <p align="center"><img src="images/bird_dashboard.png" width="95%" height="95%"></p>

Reviewer: ```restructuredtext
.. image:: images/bird_dashboard.png
   :scale: 95%
```

Advanced Configurations
#######################

You may need some advanced configurations to make your BGP scheme production-ready.
This section lists some of these parameters, but we will not dive into details,

> that's bird `User's Guide <https://bird.network.cz/?get_doc&f=bird.html&v=20>`_'s responsibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that's BIRD `User's Guide <https://bird.network.cz/?get_doc&f=bird.html&v=20>`_'s responsibility.
```

nodes. In this case, you need configure `Equal-Cost Multi-Path (ECMP) routing
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equal-cost_multi-path_routing>`_.

**This feature also relies on peer side's configuration.**

.. code:: bash

    protocol kernel {
            ipv4 {                    # Connect protocol to IPv4 table by channel
                    import none;      # Import to table, default is import all
                    export none;      # Export to protocol. default is export none
            };
    
            # Configure ECMP
            merge paths yes limit {{ N }} ;
    }

See user's manual for more detailed information.

You need to check the ECMP correctness on physical network (Core router in the
above scenario):

.. code:: bash

    CORE01# show ip route 10.5.2.0
    IP Route Table for VRF "default"
    '*' denotes best ucast next-hop
    '**' denotes best mcast next-hop
    '[x/y]' denotes [preference/metric]
    '%<string>' in via output denotes VRF <string>
    
    10.5.2.0/24, ubest/mbest: 2/0
        *via 10.4.1.7, [200/0], 13w6d, bgp-65418, internal, tag 65418
        *via 10.4.1.8, [200/0], 12w4d, bgp-65418, internal, tag 65418

Graceful restart

> ----

Reviewer: Sphinx reports that the title underline here is too short. I'm guessing it needs it to be at least as long as the title itself:
```suggestion
----------------
```

**This feature also relies on peer side's configuration.**

> Add ``graceful restart`` to each bgp section:

Reviewer: Sphinx complains about the case of `bgp` here. I guess it should be:
```suggestion
Add ``graceful restart`` to each ``bgp`` section:
```

should be very similar.

Install bird
##################

.. code:: bash

    $ yum install -y bird2

    $ systemctl enable bird
    $ systemctl restart bird

Test the installation:

.. code:: bash

    $ birdc show route
    BIRD 2.0.6 ready.

    $ birdc              # interactive shell
    BIRD 2.0.6 ready.
    bird> show bfd sessions
    There is no BFD protocol running
    bird>
    bird> show protocols all
    Name       Proto      Table      State  Since         Info
    device1    Device     ---        up     10:53:40.147

    direct1    Direct     ---        down   10:53:40.147
      Channel ipv4
        State:          DOWN
        Input filter:   ACCEPT
        Output filter:  REJECT
    ...

Basic configuration
#####################

It's hard to discuss bird configurations without considering specific BGP
schemes. However, BGP scheme design is beyond the scope of this guide.
If you are interested in this topic, refer to `BGP in the Data Center
<https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/bgp-in-the/9781491983416/>`_ (O'Reilly,
2017) for a quick start.

In the following, we will restrict our BGP scenario as follows:

.. image:: images/bird_sample_topo.png

>    :scale: 35%

Reviewer: This is what it looks like with 35%:
![bird-guide-small-images](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1764210/75355553-f703da00-58ae-11ea-9c67-b2f8c150ef3d.png)
<br>
And this is with 70%:
![bird-guide-larger-images](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1764210/75355579-05ea8c80-58af-11ea-95bf-7eb827614df8.png)

Author: `70%` is much better, i'll preview the rendering results with `make render-docs` next time :)

Author: Sorry, i thought the sizes were already `70%` in `bird.rst`, i just corrected them and pushed again. @pchaigno

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    http://docs.cilium.io

.. _bird:

****************************
Using BIRD to run BGP
****************************

`BIRD is an open-source implementation for routing Internet Protocol
packets on Unix-like operating systems <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bird_Internet_routing_daemon>`_.
If you are not familiar with it, you had best have a glance at the `User's Guide
<https://bird.network.cz/?get_doc&f=bird.html&v=20>`_ first.

`BIRD <https://bird.network.cz>`_ maintains two release families at present:
``1.x`` and ``2.x``, and the configuration format varies a lot between them.
Unless you have already deployed the ``1.x``, we suggest using ``2.x``
directly, as the ``2.x`` will live longer. In the following, we will denote
``bird`` as the ``bird2`` software.

This guide shows how to install and configure bird on CentOS `7.x` to make it

> collaborating with Cilium. Installation and configurations on other platforms

Reviewer 2: Nits:
```suggestion
collaborate with Cilium. Installation and configuration on other platforms
```

should be very similar.

Install bird
##################

.. code:: bash

    $ yum install -y bird2

    $ systemctl enable bird
    $ systemctl restart bird

Test the installation:

.. code:: bash

    $ birdc show route
    BIRD 2.0.6 ready.

    $ birdc              # interactive shell
    BIRD 2.0.6 ready.
    bird> show bfd sessions
    There is no BFD protocol running
    bird>
    bird> show protocols all
    Name       Proto      Table      State  Since         Info
    device1    Device     ---        up     10:53:40.147

    direct1    Direct     ---        down   10:53:40.147
      Channel ipv4
        State:          DOWN
        Input filter:   ACCEPT
        Output filter:  REJECT
    ...

Basic configuration
#####################

It's hard to discuss bird configurations without considering specific BGP

> schemes. However, BGP scheme design is beyond of the scope of this guide.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
schemes. However, BGP scheme design is beyond the scope of this guide.
```

If you are interested in this topic, refer to `BGP in the Data Center
<https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/bgp-in-the/9781491983416/>`_ (O'Reilly,
2017) for a quick start.

In the following, we will restrict our BGP scenario as follows:

.. image:: images/bird_sample_topo.png
   :scale: 35%

* physical network: simple 3-tier hierarchical architecture
* nodes connect to physical network via layer 2 switches
* announcing each node's PodCIDR to physical network via `bird`
* for each node, do not import route announcements from physical network

In this design, the BGP connections look like this:

.. image:: images/bird_sample_bgp.png
   :scale: 35%

This scheme is simple in that:

> * core routers learn PodCIDRs from `bird`, which makes the Pod IP addresses

Reviewer 2: You have several occurrences of “bird” between single backquotes in the document, should there be double-backquotes instead?

Author: sorry, unintentionally treated this as markdown, i'll fix them.

  routable within the entire network.
* `bird` doesn't learn routes from core routers and other nodes, which keeps the
  kernel routing table of each node clean and small, and suffering no
  performance issues.

In this scheme, each node just sends pod egress traffic to node's default
gateway (the core routers), and lets the latter do the routing.

Below is the a reference configuration for fulfilling the above purposes:

.. code:: bash

    $ cat /etc/bird.conf
    log syslog all;

    router id {{ NODE_IP }};

    protocol device {
            scan time 10;           # Scan interfaces every 10 seconds
    }

    # Disable automatically generating direct routes to all network interfaces.
    protocol direct {
            disabled;               # Disable by default
    }

>     # Forbide synchronizing BIRD routing tables with the OS kernel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # Forbid synchronizing BIRD routing tables with the OS kernel.
```
